VEP 326: cache modes (#327)
kubevirt/enhancements: veps/sig-storage/cache_modes.md

# VEP #326: Expose `directsync` and `unsafe` disk cache modes

## VEP Status Metadata

### Target releases

- This VEP targets beta for version: v1.10
- This VEP targets GA for version: 

### Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [ ] (R) Enhancement issue created, which links to VEP dir in [kubevirt/enhancements]
- [ ] (R) Alpha target version is explicitly mentioned and approved
- [ ] (R) Beta target version is explicitly mentioned and approved
- [ ] (R) GA target version is explicitly mentioned and approved

## Overview

KubeVirt currently exposes three QEMU disk cache modes to users: `none`, `writethrough`, and `writeback`. QEMU supports two additional modes -- `directsync` and `unsafe` -- that address specific performance and data-safety trade-offs not covered by the existing three. This VEP proposes adding `directsync` and `unsafe` as first-class `DriverCache` values in the KubeVirt API, along with the validation, defaulting, and test coverage required to support them.

## Motivation

> Users running database workloads (e.g. MSSQL, PostgreSQL) inside VMs often need precise control over the I/O path to balance performance and durability. The existing three modes leave gaps:

Reviewer: Can't argue with that!

3. **Do nothing**: Users can already work around missing modes by patching libvirt domain XML via hooks, but this is fragile, not validated, and not portable across migrations.

## Scalability

No scalability impact. Cache mode is a per-disk property resolved at VMI creation time. No new controllers, watchers, or API calls are introduced.

## Update/Rollback Compatibility

- **Forward compatible**: Existing VMIs with `none`, `writethrough`, or `writeback` are unaffected. New VMIs specifying `directsync` or `unsafe` are only valid on clusters running the version that introduces these values.
- **Rollback**: If a cluster is rolled back to a version that does not recognize `directsync` or `unsafe`, existing VMIs with these modes will fail validation on restart/migration. Running VMIs are unaffected until they are stopped. Administrators should update VMI specs before rollback.
- **API versioning**: The new constants are additive to the `DriverCache` type. No existing constants are modified or removed.

## Functional Testing Approach

### E2e tests

> - **Migration with cache modes**: A `DescribeTable` tests that VMIs with `writeback`, `writethrough`, `directsync`, and `unsafe` cache modes successfully complete live migration and preserve the correct cache mode in the post-migration libvirt domain XML.

Reviewer: I believe we were considering actually looking up the data in the guest post migration, does that not have value?

Author: it does to some degree ....though if we're presuming we're losing data and neither qemu nor libvirt CI catches that it's kind of....eh...but fair enough, if anything can go wrong it will surely will, one day:)
So yes, it's simple and we can do that. It's in https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17889

this line wasn't to say we shouldn't also do other checks, it's just htat we have this post-migration xml check for the other modes already, so just extend it for the new ones...

Reviewer 2: Checking the hypervisor domain configuration is violating layering and abstractions. Please avoid it, as we have been in the process of reducing our tests dependency on these.

If there is data which needs to be checked, check the VMI status or access the guest and perform some check. If the VMI status cannot express the status directly or indirectly, and accessing the guest does not help, you may suggest a new status (field, condition, etc).

Regarding the test details, IMO you should not use implementation details like "DescribeTable", it is not useful here. And I do not see the value of discussing the other cache options when this VEP focuses on 2 specifically.

> - **Shared block disk migration**: A `DescribeTable` tests migration of PVC-backed shared block disks with `none` and `directsync`, verifying cache mode preservation.

Reviewer: So this test seems to operate entirely on the XML level, so, I wonder if it has any value over a unit test or some libvirt e2e test outside kubevirt? Maybe we're missing a key step in the guest like ensuring no write lock? I just want to make sure we are testing the original scenario which inspired this test. I doubt it was just about XML correctness

Reviewer 2: I do not really understand the "cache mode preservation" thing.
The only interest part IMO is that the live-migration succeeds and that the functionality is preserved. Maybe checking that writing and reading is working smoothly with no curroptions.

I'll ignore on how you check something here, but will warn that in the functional tests we avoid checking the underlying hypervisor configuration directly.

## Motivation

Users running database workloads (e.g. MSSQL, PostgreSQL) inside VMs often need precise control over the I/O path to balance performance and durability. The existing three modes leave gaps:

- **No "safe + bypass host cache" option without guest flush penalties**: `none` bypasses the host page cache (via `O_DIRECT`) but reports writeback cache to the guest, causing QEMU to issue `fdatasync()` on every guest write. `directsync` also bypasses the host cache but issues `fdatasync()` only on guest-initiated flush commands, which can significantly reduce I/O overhead for flush-rare workloads on storage with fast sync (NVMe, BBU-backed RAID).
- **No "maximum throughput, relaxed durability" option**: Some workloads (CI pipelines, ephemeral VMs, batch processing) tolerate data loss on host crash in exchange for maximum I/O throughput. `unsafe` disables all host-side flush processing and caches aggressively, which is currently not expressible.

Additionally, `directsync` is safe for shared/multi-attach disks (it uses `O_DIRECT`, ensuring data coherency), but KubeVirt currently rejects all shareable disks unless `cache=none`.

### Performance evidence

> HammerDB TPC-C benchmarks against Microsoft SQL Server on Windows Server 2025 (32 vCPU, 440 GiB memory, virtio with 8 I/O multiqueues, 1 GiB hugepages, Intel Sapphire Rapids) show a consistent ~43-48% throughput improvement when switching from `cache=none` to `cache=directsynca` using a temporary hook (see https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17718):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HammerDB TPC-C benchmarks against Microsoft SQL Server on Windows Server 2025 (32 vCPU, 440 GiB memory, virtio with 8 I/O multiqueues, 1 GiB hugepages, Intel Sapphire Rapids) show a consistent ~43-48% throughput improvement when switching from `cache=none` to `cache=directsync` using a temporary hook (see https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17718):
```

| Virtual users            | 100        | 200        | 300        | 400        | 500        |
| ------------------------ | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- |
| `cache=none` (TPM)       | 1,023,457  | 1,041,870  | 1,004,201  | 999,718    | 1,007,184  |
| `cache=directsync` (TPM) | 1,464,588  | 1,494,152  | 1,486,263  | 1,432,949  | 1,464,549  |
| **Improvement**          | **+43.1%** | **+43.4%** | **+48.0%** | **+43.3%** | **+45.4%** |

The improvement comes from how MSSQL interacts with the guest-visible cache mode. With `cache=none`, the guest sees a writeback cache and QEMU issues `fdatasync()` on every write (FUA emulation). With `cache=directsync`, the guest sees a writethrough cache; MSSQL can rely on the writethrough guarantee and reduce the frequency of explicit flush commands, significantly lowering the `fdatasync()` overhead on the host I/O path.

## Goals

- Add `directsync` and `unsafe` as valid values for `v1.DriverCache`.
- Validate that `directsync` is only used on storage that supports `O_DIRECT` (same check as `none`).
- Allow `directsync` as a valid cache mode for shareable disks.

> - Ensure all five cache modes survive live migration with the correct libvirt XML.

Reviewer 2: What does
> with the correct libvirt XML.

mean?

This proposal is about two new cache modes, why it refers all of them and not only these two?

> - Provide unit and e2e test coverage for the new modes.

Reviewer 2: This is not a feature goal. Test coverage is to be discussed in its own specific spection.

- `writeback` vs `unsafe`: Both use the host page cache and report writeback to the guest. The difference is that `unsafe` ignores guest-initiated flush commands (`BDRV_O_NO_FLUSH`), never calling `fdatasync()`. This means maximum throughput but data loss on host crash even if the guest explicitly flushed.
- **Shareable disk safety**: `O_DIRECT` modes (`none`, `directsync`) bypass the host page cache, preventing stale reads when multiple VMs access the same block device. Modes that use the host cache (`writeback`, `writethrough`, `unsafe`) are unsafe for shared access because each VM's host may cache different views of the data.

### Validation changes

> `**SetDriverCacheMode` in `converter.go`:**

Reviewer 2: Please avoid file and function names, unless it is an API field or value. The code is changing all the time and the VEP is expected to describe a higher level abstract. This gives the freedom to implement the VEP per the current code status and not get back here for updates (e.g. after codebase refactoring).

- When `directsync` is requested, the same `O_DIRECT` support check used for `none` is applied. If the backing file/device does not support `O_DIRECT`, the mode falls back to `writethrough` (matching `none`'s existing fallback to `writeback`).
- `unsafe` requires no special backing store checks (it uses the host page cache, no `O_DIRECT` needed).

**Shareable disk validation in `Convert_v1_Disk_To_api_Disk`:**

- The existing check `cache != none → error` is relaxed to `cache != none && cache != directsync → error`, since `directsync` also uses `O_DIRECT` and is safe for shared access.

**Admission webhook:**

- The existing `DriverCache` validation already accepts any string value that maps to a valid QEMU cache mode. The webhook validates that the provided cache string is one of the five known values.

### Live migration

> All five cache modes are compatible with QEMU live migration. The cache mode is a property of the disk driver, not of the migration state, and is preserved in the libvirt domain XML on the target host. No special migration handling is needed.

Reviewer 2: Based on the discussions initiated in the implementation PR [here](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17718#issuecomment-5132150153), 
the live-migration is not safe with the unsafe caching mode.

Please consider extracting it out from this VEP.

Author: right, VEP text is not in sync now. `unsafe` has been moved to its own https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/18664 with the live migration protection.

> However they deserve to be tested, there has been issues in the past.

Reviewer 2: Can you ref any? If not, this sentence leaves the readers wandering if it works or not.

Perhaps you can just mention that PoC evaluations show that migration succeeds and that coverage is planned as part of Alpha/Beta.

Author: removed

2. **Use `io: native` as a proxy for `O_DIRECT`**: The `io` mode (`native`, `threads`) is orthogonal to cache mode. `io: native` requires `O_DIRECT` but doesn't control the caching behavior. These are separate concerns and should remain separate API fields.
3. **Do nothing**: Users can already work around missing modes by patching libvirt domain XML via hooks, but this is fragile, not validated, and not portable across migrations.

## Scalability

No scalability impact. Cache mode is a per-disk property resolved at VMI creation time. No new controllers, watchers, or API calls are introduced.

## Update/Rollback Compatibility

- **Forward compatible**: Existing VMIs with `none`, `writethrough`, or `writeback` are unaffected. New VMIs specifying `directsync` or `unsafe` are only valid on clusters running the version that introduces these values.

> - **Rollback**: If a cluster is rolled back to a version that does not recognize `directsync` or `unsafe`, existing VMIs with these modes will fail validation on restart/migration. Running VMIs are unaffected until they are stopped. Administrators should update VMI specs before rollback.

Reviewer 2: Rollback is not supported by Kubevirt in general. You can mention the expected behavior here from a theoretical aspect, but emphasize that is not expected to be used as of today.

Author: removed

- **API versioning**: The new constants are additive to the `DriverCache` type. No existing constants are modified or removed.

## Functional Testing Approach

> ### E2e tests

Reviewer 2: I would recommend calling these "Functional".
IMO e2e is confusing, but this is a nit.

- **Migration with cache modes**: A `DescribeTable` tests that VMIs with `writeback`, `writethrough`, `directsync`, and `unsafe` cache modes successfully complete live migration and preserve the correct cache mode in the post-migration libvirt domain XML.
- **Shared block disk migration**: A `DescribeTable` tests migration of PVC-backed shared block disks with `none` and `directsync`, verifying cache mode preservation.

## Implementation History

- 2025-06-04: Initial PR adding `directsync` and `unsafe` to API types, validation, and test coverage (kubevirt/kubevirt#17718).
- 2025-06-04: VEP created.

## Graduation Requirements

> ### Alpha

Reviewer 2: The VEP metadata points to Beta and bypasses Alpha. Please elaborate on the reasoning that merits skipping Alpha.

Also, as a pre-GA release, it requires a FG.
The only way to avoid a FG is to target it for GA, which may be reasonable if you provide strong reasoning.

- `directsync` and `unsafe` accepted as valid `DriverCache` values.

> - `O_DIRECT` validation for `directsync` matches `none`.

Reviewer 2: Can you express this  in a more abstract language?

Author: removed, leaving xml preservation to unit tests only

- `directsync` allowed for shareable disks.
- Unit tests for all validation paths.

> - E2e tests for migration with all five cache modes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Functional tests for live-migration with the new `directsync` and `unsafe` cache modes.
```
